In disaster management, relocation/resettlement is more often seen as the worst option as it gives the impression that nothing else can be done about the hazard and people have to be moved. Relocation is unpopular, as plans to relocate entire communities are costly, mainly because of the need to acquire alternative locations and the provision of housing for those resettled. More significantly, at least on the part of those being relocated, it provokes social disruption and upheaval when people are bundled into an alien environment. Notwithstanding the influence of structural/societal forces, people are also reluctant to be relocated far from relatives, friends and their place of work (or schools in the case of children). Examines the effectiveness of government‐run permanent relocation schemes as a response to flood hazards in Malaysia.

In Malaysia, the DID is the recognised flood management authority in the country. The DID, however, is a department dominated by engineers whose traditional training is to control floods. Not surprisingly, the DID’s main flood mitigation policy and strategy consists largely of structural measures (for example dams and embankments to control flood flows). Despite the DID’s claims in recent decades that it has taken on board non-structural measures (for example land use planning and flood forecasting and warning systems to mitigate the impact of flooding), it does not have the expertise in these areas and implementation of such measures are negligible, resulting in a lop-sided approach favouring structural measures (Chan and Parker, 1996). Hj Ahmad Hussaini (2007), the current Director-General of DID stresses that the current policy guidelines for implementing flood mitigation measures include the following: (i) Implementation of structural flood mitigation in terms of engineering and socio-economic environment; (ii) Implementation of complementary non-structural measures; (iii) Implementation of non-engineering measures where there is no engineering solution; and (iv) Continuation on strengthening flood forecasting and warning systems. All these are based on experience gained from a National Water Resources Study carried out in 1982 on structural and nonstructural measures for flood mitigation and management (Japan International Cooperation Agency, 1982). In addition, the government have also conducted a number of flood mitigation projects but again these were mostly structural mitigation measures such as canalization of rivers, raising river embankments and the building of multi-purpose dams. Interestingly, Chan (2015) noted that despite their high costs compared to non-structural measures, structural measures continue to be favoured until today. Consequently, the financial allocations for such projects was increased significantly in Malaysia’s every subsequent five yearly development plans. Such escalating expenditures put a heavy strain on the government and there have been suggestions to relook at the strategies via a more proactive approach in finding ways and means to address the flood disasters in a holistic manner. The current Government machinery allows the Economic Planning Unit of the Prime Minister’s Department to coordinate all aspects of planning, design and implementation of water resources (including flood management) in the country. 

It is theoretically responsible for all the operations at the national, state, district, mukim (sub-district) and village levels. In reality, however, it coordinates operations at the national level and overlooks operations at the state level. Much of the operations in each state are left to be run by the respective state authorities. Its main task is to ensure that assistance and aid are provided to flood victims in an orderly and effective manner from the national level downwards. As a result, its approach to disaster mitigation is largely reactive (Chan, 1995). For example, this body meets annually just before the onset of the northeast monsoon season to organise flood disaster preparedness, evacuation and rehabilitation work. It is also more of a welfare body than it is a flood management organisation. At the federal level, the National Security Council (NSC) is the secretariat for the Disaster Relief and Preparedness Committee (DRPC) which comprises members from the Ministries of Information, Finance, National Unity and Social development, Transport, the Federal Chief Secretary, the Federal Police Department and the Federal Armed Forces. The DRPC coordinates all relief operations from the Malaysian Control Centre in Kuala Lumpur. At the state level, there are 13 State Disaster Relief and Preparedness Committees (SDRPC) for Malaysia. 


